update and add dev agent info (#8718)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-ai/developer-agent.md

sidebar_label: "Developer agent"
tags: [AI, Agents, Studio]
---

import DevAgent from '/snippets/_developer-agent-studio-setup.md';

# Developer agent <Lifecycle status="beta,managed,managed_plus"/>

<IntroText>
The <Constant name="dev_agent" /> is the next evolution of <Constant name="copilot" /> in the <Constant name="cloud_ide" />, purpose-built to streamline the developer experience. As an agentic capability within <Constant name="copilot" />, it can write, refactor, and validate dbt models using your project's structured context &mdash; including lineage, metadata, governance, and the <Constant name="semantic_layer" />.
</IntroText>

While <Constant name="copilot" /> is the AI-powered product surface you interact with across the <Constant name="dbt_platform" />, the <Constant name="dev_agent" /> is the DevEx-focused workflow within it &mdash; designed to help you move faster by generating or refactoring models, tests, and documentation from natural language prompts, while keeping every change auditable and aligned with your dbt project.

The <Constant name="dev_agent" /> supports the following use cases:

> - **Generate semantic models, tests, and docs** &mdash; Scaffold YAML definitions from existing models and save time on manual setup.

Reviewer: I think most of our docs use this format:
```suggestion
- **Generate semantic models, tests, and docs**: Scaffold YAML definitions from existing models and save time on manual setup.
```

Author: ah shucks! i just love/prefer emdashes so much

> - **Build or modify models** &mdash; Create new or modify existing dbt models from natural language descriptions of the transformation or logic you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Build or modify models**: Create new or modify existing dbt models from natural language descriptions of the transformation or logic you need.
```

> - **Light refactors** &mdash; Rename columns, change materializations, or adjust logic. The agent also keeps associated YAML files in sync with any changes it makes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Light refactors**: Rename columns, change materializations, or adjust logic. The agent also keeps associated YAML files in sync with any changes it makes.
```

> The <Constant name="dev_agent" /> always has access to the latest dbt-recommended guidance through [dbt agent skills](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) &mdash; a curated collection of instructions and scripts managed by dbt Labs that cover analytics engineering, semantic layer, testing, platform operations, and more. These skills are natively available to the agent out of the box, so you don't need to configure or maintain them! 🎉

Reviewer: The product name in the repo uses `Agent Skills`
```suggestion
The <Constant name="dev_agent" /> always has access to the latest dbt-recommended guidance through [dbt Agent Skills](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) &mdash; a curated collection of instructions and scripts managed by dbt Labs covering analytics engineering, semantic layer, testing, platform operations, and more. These skills are available to the agent out of the box, so you don't need to configure or maintain them! 🎉
```

## Prerequisites

- An Enterprise-tier plan &mdash; Contact your account manager for access.
- A [<Constant name="cloud" /> account](https://www.getdbt.com/signup) and [Developer seat license](/docs/cloud/manage-access/seats-and-users).
- A [development environment](/docs/cloud/studio-ide/develop-in-studio#get-started-with-the-studio-ide) and credentials set up in the <Constant name="cloud_ide" />.

> - [Enable account access to <Constant name="copilot" /> features](/docs/cloud/enable-dbt-copilot) if you haven't already.

Reviewer: Suggesting this change so that it's consistent with lines 29-31
```suggestion
- [Account access to <Constant name="copilot" /> features](/docs/cloud/enable-dbt-copilot).
```

#### Availability and considerations

- The <Constant name="dev_agent" /> is available in the [<Constant name="cloud_ide" />](/docs/cloud/studio-ide/develop-in-studio) only. It's not available in VS Code or the <Constant name="cloud_cli" />.
- It works across all engines (<Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and <Constant name="core" />).

> - It does not retain conversation context between sessions. If you close or leave the <Constant name="cloud_ide" />, the conversation resets. However, if you saved any file changes the agent already made, those changes will stay in your branch. Unsaved changes are lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It does not retain conversation context between sessions. If you close the <Constant name="cloud_ide" />, the conversation resets. If you saved any file changes the agent made, those changes will remain in your branch. Unsaved changes are lost.
```

> - Currently, plan mode isn't supported. The <Constant name="dev_agent" /> drafts changes directly without showing a plan first. Use **Ask** mode if you want to approve each file change before it is persisted.

Reviewer: What is plan mode? Is it a new mode that will be added in addition to Ask and Code?

<img width="304" height="218" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5902b0f6-5af1-4042-868d-30028acd9a66" />

Should it be:

```suggestion
- Currently, **Plan** mode isn't supported. The <Constant name="dev_agent" /> drafts changes directly without showing a plan first. Use **Ask** mode if you want to approve each file change before it is persisted.
```

Author: yes it will be added in the future

> - You cannot edit a prompt after submitting it. To refine your request, use **Start over** to reset the session and submit a new prompt.

Reviewer: I can't seem to find where `Start over` is?

Reviewer: I found it! Would it be more helpful to say:

```suggestion
- You cannot edit a prompt after submitting it. To refine your request, click the **Start over** button located at the top right corner of the Copilot panel. This resets the session and you can submit a new prompt.
```

> ## Use the Developer agent

Reviewer: Other task-based sections on this page use a gerund. Should we change this to:
```suggestion
## Using the Developer agent
```

<DevAgent />

<div style={{maxWidth: '100%', margin: '20px 0'}}>
<video width="100%" controls autoPlay muted loop playsInline>
  <source src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/dev-agent.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
<span style={{display: 'block', textAlign: 'center', fontSize: '0.9em', color: 'var(--ifm-color-emphasis-600)', marginTop: '8px'}}>Example of using the Developer agent to refactor a model in the Studio IDE.</span>
</div>

For more details on the <Constant name="dev_agent" /> and how it works, see the following sections.

#### Panel controls

The <Constant name="copilot" /> panel contains:

- **Quick-action buttons** (top) &mdash; The buttons at the top of the panel (**Generate documentation**, **Semantic model**, **Generate generic tests**, **Metrics**) pre-fill prompts for common tasks. When selected, the text field is pre-filled with the prompt for the selected action.
- **Agent mode button** (bottom left) &mdash; Switch between **Ask** and **Code** mode. Click the button to change modes.

> - **Text input field** (bottom right) &mdash; Type your prompt in the text field to describe what you want to build or change. Use `/` to browse available commands, or type `@` to select a model as context. This scopes the agent's changes to that resource.

Author: in my testing the `/` didn't really do anything yet but might be en route!

Author: resolved and removed

> - **Quick actions** (top) &mdash; The <Constant name="cloud_ide" /> surfaces quick actions at the top of the panel to help you get started with common tasks, like generating documentation, semantic models, tests, and metrics. When selected, the text field is pre-filled with a prompt for the selected action. These quick actions may evolve over time as new capabilities are added.

Reviewer: I found the directional labels (top, bottom left, etc) a bit difficult to follow when looking at the screenshot. It wasn't immediately clear which control each description referred to, especially with multiple elements positioned near each other.

Would it make sense to use numbered callouts in the screenshot instead? That way, each UI element could map directly to its corresponding description in the list. I think that would make the section easier to scan. We have guidelines for using numbered callouts [here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/blob/current/contributing/content-style-guide.md#Images).

Author: addressed

<img width="984" height="652" alt="Screenshot 2026-03-12 at 14 11 15" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/349a3781-fef5-4d3e-ba6d-5d7b04d7517e" />

- **Text input field** (bottom right) &mdash; Type your prompt in the text field to describe what you want to build or change. Type `@` to select a model as context. This scopes the agent's changes to that resource.
- **Model context** (bottom left, next to mode) &mdash; Shows the currently open file. Use `@` in the text field to reference a different model. Click **x** to remove the model context.

> - **Start over** (top right) &mdash; Resets the current session. A confirmation prompt will appear &mdash; click **Start over** to confirm, or **Cancel** to return to your current conversation. This action cannot be undone.- **Stop** (bottom right) &mdash; Stops the current session and agent processing. This action cannot be undone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Start over** (top right) &mdash; Resets the current session. When you click this button, a confirmation prompt appears. Click **Start over** to confirm, or **Cancel** to return to your current conversation. You cannot undo this action.
- **Stop** (bottom right) &mdash; Stops the current session and agent processing. You cannot undo this action.
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/dev-agent-ask-mode.png" width="95%" title="The Developer agent in Ask mode, requesting confirmation before applying file edits." />

</SimpleTable>

You can switch between modes at any time.

#### Reviewing agent suggestions

When the <Constant name="dev_agent" /> proposes code changes, you can review them before they are committed to your project:

- **View the diff** &mdash; The agent displays a diff of the proposed changes. Click **Show all X lines** to expand and view the full suggestion.
- **Line indicators** &mdash; Added and removed lines are highlighted with line number indicators so you can see exactly what changed.
- **Copy or open in editor** &mdash; Use the options in the top-right corner of the diff view to copy the suggestion or open it directly in the editor.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/dev-agent-code-suggestion.png" width="95%" title="The Developer agent displaying a diff of proposed YAML changes with line indicators and copy/open options." />

#### Granting command permissions

> To validate or run models during a session, the agent executes dbt commands using `invoke_dbt`. You'll be prompted to approve each request. For example:

Author: this is a relatively 'new' command for users. the concept is understandable but is 'invoke_dbt' a copilot thing that we'll see across diff agents?

Reviewer 2: We are hoping to change this before beta. The dbt commands will look more native e.g. `dbt run` `dbt compile` `dbt show` rather than `invoke_dbt(...`.

Author: ok thanks so i'll update the commadn then

> - **View the diff** &mdash; The agent displays a diff of the proposed changes. Click **Show all X lines** to expand and view the full suggestion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **View the diff**: The agent displays a diff of the proposed changes. Click **Show all X lines** to expand and view the full suggestion.
```

> - **Line indicators** &mdash; Added and removed lines are highlighted with line number indicators so you can see exactly what changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Line indicators**: Added and removed lines are highlighted with line number indicators so you can see exactly what changed.
```

> - **Copy or open in editor** &mdash; Use the options in the top-right corner of the diff view to copy the suggestion or open it directly in the editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Copy or open in editor**: Use the options in the top-right corner of the diff view to copy the suggestion or open it directly in the editor.
```

```
dbt compile --select model_name
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/dev-agent-invoke-dbt.png" width="95%" title="The Developer agent requesting permission to run a dbt command." />

> You can respond with one of the following options:

Reviewer: Using "respond" gives me the impression that I have to enter the phrase
```suggestion
You can select one of the following options:
```

<SimpleTable>

| Option | Behavior |
|--------|----------|
| **Yes, run once** | Grants permission to run this specific command one time. |

> | **Yes, and allow dbt commands for the session** | Grants permission to run dbt commands for the remainder of your session without prompting again. |

Reviewer: Should this be:
```suggestion
| **Yes, and allow `dbt_command_name` for the session** | Grants permission to run dbt commands for the remainder of your session without prompting again. |
```
So that it looks like a placeholder for the dbt command Copilot would run?

| **No** | Denies the request. The agent will not run the command. |

</SimpleTable>

## Writing effective prompts

> Good prompts include the **scope** (which models or area of the project), the **intent** (the transformation or business logic you want), and any **constraints** (naming conventions, materialization, tests). Here are a few examples:

Reviewer: Using italics for emphasis
```suggestion
Good prompts include the _scope_ (which models or area of the project), the _intent_ (the transformation or business logic you want), and any _constraints_ (naming conventions, materialization, tests). Here are a few examples:
```

| Task | Example prompt |
|------|---------------|
| Build a new model | "Create a model called `fct_daily_revenue` that joins `stg_orders` and `stg_payments`, aggregates revenue by day, and materializes as a table." |
| Refactor an existing model | "Refactor `fct_orders` to use incremental materialization. Keep existing tests and follow our naming conventions." |

> | Generate tests and docs | "Add not_null and unique tests to the primary key of `dim_customers`, and generate documentation for all columns." |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Generate tests and docs | "Add `not_null` and `unique` tests to the primary key of `dim_customers`, and generate documentation for all columns." |
```
